Voiceover: What is a non-coding RNA?
A non-coding RNA, or an ncRNA, as it is abbreviated,
is a functional RNA molecule that actually skips
this last step and is not translated into a protein.
In other words, they just go directly from transcription
into an RNA molecule and then go off
to perform any number of vital functions within the cell.
There are many examples of non-coding RNAs,
including micro RNAs, ribosomal RNAs, transfer RNA,
the list goes on and on.
As we go through each of these different types
and examples of non-coding RNAs,
you'll start to see that there's
sort of an emerging theme, here.
That is that most of these non-coding RNAs participate
in either transcription or translation
in one capacity or another.
Let's start off with micro RNAs.
Micro RNAs, or miRNAs, function in transcriptional
and post transcriptional regulation of gene expression.
They do this by base paring with complementary sequences
within mRNA, or messenger RNA, molecules.
This usually results in gene silencing
through translational repression or target degradation.
In essence, the mRNA to which these micro RNAs bind
are prevented from being translated
or they are sent on a pathway for degradation.
The next set of non-coding RNAs that we'll be talking about
are all involved in translation.
The first of which is ribosomal RNA.
Ribosomes are the cellular machinery used
to translate mRNA into proteins.
It is made up of one type of RNA molecule, ribosomal RNA.
Transfer RNAs are an adapter molecule that links the codons
in an mRNA strand to the corresponding amino acids.
This is another type of non-coding RNA
that you'll see in translation.
The thrid type is called snow RNA,
which stands for small nucleolar RNA.
It's a class of small RNA molecules
that guide covalent modifcations of ribosomal RNA,
transfer RNA, and small nuclear RNAs,
primarily through methylation, which is the addition
of methyl groups, or pseudouridylation,
which is the addition of an isomer
of the nucleoside uridine.
Another class of non-coding RNAs
are the small nuclear RNAs, or snRNAs,
not to be confused with the snow RNAs,
the small nucleolar RNAs that we just talked about.
Small nuclear RNAs get their name from the fact
that the average length of these RNA molecules
is approximately 150 nucleotides.
Their primary function is in the processing
of pre-mRNA in the nucleus.
They also aid in the regulation of transcription factors
or a particular RNA polymerase, RNA polymerase two,
as well as maintaining telomeres, which are the regions
of repetitive nucleotide sequences at the end of a chromotid,
which protects the end of the chromosome from deterioration
during chromosomal replication.
SnRNA can be associated with a set of specific proteins
and form complexes that are called
small nuclear ribonucleic proteins, or snRNPs
or sometimes people just call them snRPs.
There is a special snRP complex called the spliceosome,
made up of five small nuclear RNAs and over 150 proteins
that is responsible for splicing, or removing,
the introns contained in messenger RNA,
which is a major step in the post transcriptional
modification that takes place in the nucleus of eukaryotes.
The way the the spiceosome does this is that it binds
to specific sequences in the pre-messenger RNA strand
and performs two sequential transesterification reactions
that splice out the intron and then [lagate] the two exons
to form a mature mRNA.
Now you know a little bit more some examples
of non-coding RNAs and some of the functions
that they perform within the cell.