•
- [Voiceover] In this video we're going to talk about
neurodevelopmental disorders.
Maybe you've heard of some of these disorders before,
like Down syndrome,
or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder,
also known as ADHD.
So these are some examples of
neurodevelopmental disorders, but before we talk
more about these and some of the
other neurodevelopmental disorders.
Let's actually start off by breaking this term down,
so that we can figure out what exactly
a neurodevelopmental disorder even is.
So we say neuro here and neuro refers to the brain, right?
Well we say that because with each of these different
disorders, we see impairments in some of our
brain related functions.
Things like our memory, our learning abilities,
our social skills, our ability to make movements,
and maintain our self control.
These are some of our brain related functions.
And we say developmental here,
because these disorders arise when something goes wrong
in the brain while it's developing,
and this usually happens pretty early on.
Often during pregnancy or sometimes shortly after birth.
So what I really want to focus on here is
classifying these different neurodevelopmental disorders,
and the way that I want to do this, the way I want to
organize these disorders, is by looking at which
brain related functions are impaired,
at least primarily in each group.
So it turns out that for quite a few of the different
types of neurodevelopmental disorders,
we can actually start to see some clues that
something just isn't quite normal in the brain,
and we can see these clues often pretty early on.
Sometimes within the first few months or maybe the first
few years of life or so, and we sort of get clued in
to any potential developmental issues by comparing
the developmental milestones of any given child
that we may be concerned about,
to normal developmental milestones.
So developmental milestones,
what are some examples of that?
Well, things like a baby sitting up without needing
to be held or supported, or crawling,
or babbling, or even fully talking, or smiling,
or making eye contact, all of these little behaviors
they should be happening pretty early on,
and we kind of know about when they're supposed to happen.
So these are some of the milestones that we can use
to track that the brain is developing normally.
But let's actually look at this a bit better.
Let's use a little graph here to talk more about this,
because I think it'll help things to sort of make more sense
with neurodevelopmental disorders.
So let's draw a little graph out here,
and we'll put age down at the bottom here on our X axis,
and we'll use our Y axis here to categorize those
behaviors that we talked about, those brain functions.
So let's call one category Social,
and then we'll make another one here called Motor,
and let's put Cognitive down here.
And this will all make sense in a minute,
so just go with me for a second.
Oh, and I should mention that we normally think about these
milestones as age ranges rather than specific ages,
because everyone's different, right?
Everyone develops at a slightly different pace.
So the normal time for a certain milestone
is a range to account for these differences that are
totally normal between different people.
So, for example, let's put something down here
that fits into our Social category here.
So, somewhere between about the age of one and a half
months on our chart here, and about three months.
Somewhere between here is when we would expect our
baby here to start smiling in response to something.
Maybe if mom smiles that makes the baby smile,
and we put smiling in our Social category here,
because smiling is actually an early indication
that the baby is developing its social skills.
She's learning to respond to other people, and show them
how she feels, and what about our Motor category here?
Well let's actually split this up into two.
So we've got Fine Motor, so this is things like
picking up small objects with your
pointer finger and your thumb.
And we've got Gross Motor, so big movements
that use big muscle groups like our legs.
So things like walking without any help at all.
So let's actually look at walking as our example for Motor.
So the age range that we would normally
expect for this motor milestone of walking
is somewhere in between about 12 months old here
to about 16 months, that would be about the normal range.
So walking, I mean if you think about it, it kind of
requires pretty good development of a
few different motor skills, right?
You need to be able to move and coordinate your arms
and your legs, and you need to be able to sort of speed up
and slow down as necessary, kind of in response
to your environment or what you want to do.
So being able to walk independently, by yourself,
somewhere in this time range here, that tells us that
motor development is coming along pretty well.
And for our Cognitive category here,
well we have the first word, that's a pretty exciting one.
So a word like mamma or dadda.
We would expect that to come out somewhere in between
about nine months here and 15 months.
So these are just a few examples of some of the
milestones that we know about.
So that's kind of a snapshot of what normal
development is like, but what happens
when someone has a neurodevelopmental disorder?
Well, because neurodevelopmental disorders
impair some aspect of development,
for some kids with some of these disorders,
we might actually see a delay in them reaching
some of these important milestones, right?
And which ones are delayed?
Well that really depends on which
disorder we're talking about.
So I'll give an example in a second here,
but let me just say that each neurodevelopmental disorder,
generally affects one of these domains here the most.
But they're still often detrimental effects
in some of the other domains.
Although that might not always be the case,
it really can depend a little bit on each individual
even with the same disorder.
So let's use the neurodevelopmental disorder,
cerebral palsy, as our example here.
So cerebral palsy involves trouble with making movements,
and controlling our muscles, because motor development
has been impaired in some way.
So for a child with cerebral palsy,
we often start to pick up on the disorder
when they aren't reaching their motor milestones, right?
So if our kid here wasn't walking by themselves by
about the age of 18 months old,
we might start to be a little concerned about
how their motor development is going,
and in turn we might start to consider
developmental disorders of movement like
cerebral palsy as the underlying cause.
And I won't talk about the cause of these disorders
that I'm going to talk about in this video.
That gets a little complicated for now,
but I just want to focus on laying out the groundwork
for thinking about neurodevelopmental disorders.
So just sticking with our motor milestones for a second,
another disorder where we'd see some
motor issues is Tourette's syndrome.
So for someone with Tourette's the main signs we see
are these unusual, repetitive movements or sounds,
like blinking or grunting, maybe.
Now for a child with Tourette's we might not really
see delays in these milestones.
Instead we might notice unexpected movements,
or maybe extra sounds start to crop up somewhere
between the ages of about three and nine years old,
but we still say that something like Tourette's
is a neurodevelopmental disorder, because the reason
the person has it is because there was some sort of event
that occured during development, right?
And that affected a part of their brain.
So what about our social domain here?
Well an example of a neurodevelopmental disorder
in this domain, would be autism spectrum disorder.
Where the main thing that we see are
impairments in social skills.
Well for someone with autism spectrum disorder,
we might see clues of these social impairments
if our baby here isn't smiling
by about the age of three months old.
That's starting to get a little late
to develop that behavior, and actually,
probably one of the most specific signs
of autism spectrum disorder, would be if our child here
just wasn't really making meaningful eye contact
with mom or dad.
Then we might start to think about a developmental
disorder of social skills like autism spectrum disorder,
and another disorder that we can put down as a social
or behavioral disorder here,
we can put down ADHD.
And someone with ADHD, what they have trouble with
is really focusing on particular tasks for too long,
and sometimes they struggle with being
hyperactive or restless.
So with ADHD, even though we put it down here
because it's more of a behavioral disorder.
Kids with ADHD often also have language impairments.
So if our child here wasn't saying their first word
around, about this age range.
Well we might start to consider ADHD as a possible
underlying neurodevelopmental disorder.
And finally our cognitive milestone section here.
Here's where we put disorders like Down syndrome,
which manifests as various intellectual disabilities.
Like problems with learning and memory, or even language.
So we might start to consider an intellectual disability
like Down syndrome if our kid here
isn't meeting some of these cognitive milestones.
So if they aren't saying their first word by
about this age range, we may also start to
consider things like Down syndrome.
And let's put down Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders,
or FASD over here with Down syndrome.
So FASD is another disorder where we see people
having trouble with quite a few different intellectual
tasks, like learning or speaking.
So for these disorders here that we've looked at,
these are just examples of some of the milestones that
might be delayed in someone with one of these disorders.
Sometimes we might not really see any major delays
in our key milestones, and sometimes we might see
quite a few delays in several different milestones,
and this can depend on things like the
specific disorder that the person has, and the severity
of the impairments or damage in their brain.
But hopefully this gets you thinking a bit about
milestones and normal development,
and the different types of neurodevelopmental disorders.